- Welcome to this talk. Picking a good, sorry, Picking a Good Spot, Naughty Dog's Post System. I am Alan Cho, a senior game programmer from Naughty Dog and I have the pleasure of working on the last four games from Naughty Dog. Unchartered 4, Unchartered the Last Legacy, The Last of Us, Part II and the Last of Us, Part I. And for those who are not familiar with part one, this is a remake of the original of the Last of Us. So it is ordered after part two. I know it's confusing. All right. A quick shout out to the current and former dogs who contributed to the post system covered in this talk. John Bellamy, Max Dyckhoff, Travis McIntosh, Kareem Omar, Eli Omernick, and Hecate Robinson. So let's dive straight into it. Our problem is picking a good spot. This is a very common gameplay problem like where you want to spawn your player or where you want to tell an NPC to take cover. And at Naughty Dog, we encountered this spot picking problem mostly in AI specifically where telling where NPCs should go. So that will be the main focus of this talk, but the same principles can apply to anywhere in gameplay. In this talk I will go over the evolution of our problem space and our solutions in our recent games. First, let's look at the video of an NPC shooting at the player. When the player breaks line of sight, the NPC will attempt to reposition to a different cover that can reestablish line of sight to shoot at the player. So as you can see, the player runs around and NPC wants to reposition to find a new place to shoot at the player, and the player does it again behind this low cover and the NPC repositions spec to the first cover to shoot at the player again. And then the next example, is when a player throws a bottle to distract the NPC. - The hell was that? - The NPC will check several covers to clear the distraction. This is the first cover. Now the NPC moves to the second cover and then they cleared a distraction. - Nothing. - Okay, so first, before telling NPC where to go, we need to figure out exactly where an NPC can go And what are those spots? We call them posts. The posts can be tool generated merely placed in editors or dynamically generated at low time or run time. We try not to generate many posts at run time for performance reasons, and we used to generate posts at tools time, but now we have moved to generated, oh sorry, we used to generate them at low time of the assets, but now we have moved to generating them at tools time. We call the system post our post system. If you are familiar with Unreal, you are probably thinking of Unreal's environment, query system and you will be correct. Both systems are very similar in their purposes. And here's a quick shout out to Matthew Jack on his article on Game Air Pro Technical Position Selection and Architecture and Query Language. I was only made aware of this article two days ago and then I just gave the quick read and I inherited our post system. So I did not know the origin of our post system. And as it turns out, a lot of the terminology obviously came from this article. So I got this acknowledgement in time. Yeah. Sorry. Here are the few post types we have. The green ones are open posts, cover posts in orange, hand posts in magenta, perch post in cyan. And here are these post types and they're corresponding generation source. Some of them are from nav data, nav meshes, nav ledges, some of them are for APs, short for action packs. These are markups either hand placed by designers in tools or tool generated from level collision. Since nav match is our major source of open source generation, let's take a closer look at it. This is done at tools time. So performance is not a concern. We just use a very brute force approach for each nav match. We iterate over all the grip points inside the bounding box of the nav mesh, and then if the grip point is on the nav mesh, we generate a post there. Very simple. These are the grip points. And then another example, Dynamic Posts. We mentioned earlier that we can also generate posts at runtime. So these are some posts generated around the player for Buddy NPCs to go to. Now we know where the NPCs can go to. How do we select or pick a good post to go to? And just a quick note, you don't really need to read the small debug text on the screenshots. I only just need you to pay attention to the colors and their positions. So the blue text there is where the NPC is assigned the ideal post to go to. Now how do we pick a good post for the NPC to go to? We rate or score each post using a set of post criteria. Here the red ones are the posts that are scored lower and the green ones are the ones scored higher and turns out to, there are only two green ones here and one of them is the highest score. So it's picked by the NPC. Here are some commonly used criteria in the game. The first one is very straightforward, linear distance, like the distance from the NPC to their targets, allies, players, distractions or whatever. And the second one is path distance, which is different from linear distance. That is the length of the path to each post from the NPC. For example, if the player is on the other side of a fence, an NPC with a gun wants to reposition to shoot the player only cares about the linear distance. But if the NPC only has a mailer weapon, the NPC needs to call all the way around the fence. So to that NPC, path distance is more important. Another useful criterion is visibility that is done by raycasts. And then time since last exposed is useful for non-combat post-election like investigation or search. So NPCs, they don't try, they prefer not to expose recently exposed posts. So we define a list of post selectors in our game. This is the list. You don't have read it, you just know that's a list. It's a list of post selectors we define in script by designers. And then what each post selector is a list of criteria for scoring the posts. And we are going to use this combat cover post selector as an example. It specifies that it wants to select cover posts. The first criterion is the visibility and you'll see that the fail score is 0.01. The way we combine these, the score from each criterion is each criterion generates a score, a normalized score between zero and one. And we either combine them using weighted average or multiply them together, mostly multiplying them together. And if the final score is zero, we reject a post. They are not even taken into consideration. So here you see the fail score is a very small number, but it's not zero. We call this a soft fail. That means all if there are no other visible posts left, we have, we still have the option to use the post that cannot see that, that don't have line of sight to the target. Next criterion, weapon range. We have a curve here, mapping value of zero to one and then 72.6. It's just like a mapping to normalized score so that all the scores are within zero and one. And then path distance, again, it's mapped to a normalized score. And here is the criterion path find not near player so that when the NPC takes a NPC prefers posts that don't lead them anywhere close to the player. And here we also use a soft fail score. Last one is just linear distance. Again, a curve mapping linear distance to a normalized score. So the first implementation is very straightforward. This is our ground truth brute-force implementation. We just iterate over all the post for each post, we iterate over all the criterion and then we use the criterion to evaluate the post to get the score. And then we add or combine the score together. Here the function is called add score, but really what it does is it's either doing the aforementioned widget average or multiplying the scores together. And we do have other non-trivial criteria in later games. So brute-force is not going to cut it, but based on word of mouth in the company, this is how it was done in the first Uncharted. Because in Uncharted One we didn't really have large combat spaces and the only posts we had were cover posts and the criterion or the criteria were really cheap. They are mostly just distance checks. So brute-force implementation was enough for Uncharted One and one obvious optimization is early out. So we order all the criteria from cheapest to the most expensive, roughly. And then as soon as we encounter a multiplier criterion that gives you a score of zero, that means the final score is going to be zero. So there is no point in continue to evaluate more expensive criteria at this point. So we just reject the post and then move on. Before moving on to more optimization techniques, I want to look at some rating examples. First one is standing ground. The embassy wants to stand ground at the, at a safe distance from the player while keep shooting at the player. The list of criteria we use would cause the NPC to prefer shorter path from the NPC themselves and then a reasonable weapon range based on the weapon. So here you see the, the redder posts are the lower scored ones and there are some yellow orange ones and then some green ones. So the NPC would end up picking one of the green ones to move to and continue shooting at the player. The next example is for exposing the target. Here the player is hiding behind a low cover and then the NPC wants to find a post that can see the player. So as mentioned before for visibility tests we use raycasts. I just covered the left part with a black box because that's just some distracting debug prints. So the green lines are the raycast from posts that can see And then the red ones are the ones where the line of sights are are blocked. And raycasts aren't exactly cheap. So we time slice the raycasts and cache the results over multiple frames before NPC can get the result, use the results to score the posts. So when the NPC wants to find a post that involve raycasting, it first requests the raycasts, we time slice the raycasts, cache the results. And that's several frames later the NPC when the results are ready, NPC can use it. And one advantage of caching is that when other NPCs want to use a similar set of posts, it can reuse some of the raycast that have already that have already been done. And let's take a closer look at how we cache our raycast results. Why is the slide not advancing? Oh, here we go. Okay. So we represent sets of posts whether or not a post is inside a set using bit arrays. In the Last of Us, Part I, we have a maximum of 8,000 posts in a post set and it is a dense bit array that is 128 64 inch, 64 bit integers. Since they're pure integers, it's really fast to just perform bit wise operations on them for taking a union intersection. Other set operations. So each post recast result entry contains two bit arrays. One is the bits, one is the post set that represents the arrays being cast to or cast from. And then the other array is the binary results from each post. For instance, if post number three is inside this cache, then the array cast post bit array, the third bit will be set. And when it's, it's time to query whether or not the results you want are in the cache we iterate over the cache entries from the oldest to the, sorry, from the latest to the oldest among the ones that are still valid. And we Bitwise-OR the post set of each cache entry until either this post set has become a super set the bitwise-OR of the visibility results of the entries you already iterated over it. And otherwise, if we exhaust the entries before reaching a super set of the requested post bits, that means we have a cache mess. So we need to request additional raycasts. And the, the post you request the raycast on is fairly simple. You just subtract the posts that that already cached from the post. You need to have raycast results from. Let's take a look again at this investigation example. So now the first cover, we use the criteria to prefer cover posts near the distraction which is the bottle plus line of sight. And then the subsequent cover we prefer unexposed corner and we have a minimum distance from the first post and we don't require a line of sight. As the games get larger and more complicated, we ran into a problem of having lots of posts. In this level, this NPC wants repositioned to find a better angle to attack the player, but in this level there are more than 4,000 posts. So we cannot iterate over every single one of them and score them. That will be impractical even when we are doing the early optimization. So the next optimization we did was collection volumes. Here we only collect the posts around the player within a sphere and some around the NPC and then some within a, what's that called? Weapon range. A reasonable weapon range around the player that is like a donut shape. So these are the posts that are actually being evaluated. You can see a lot of posts that were outside of these three volumes were just removed from consideration. And here's the combat cover selector again. Here is the section that says specifies where we want to collect the posts from. Weapon ranges that donut and then self tight is the sphere around the NPC target tight is the sphere around the target. And on the right is the code for the early out optimization plus on the top the collection code we collect post in volumes. And then inside this function, it's also very straightforward. We iterate over all the posts for each post. collection volumes and if any of these volumes contain the post, we add the post to the collective post set. So this is already a very good next step from brute-force, but there is still something about this approach that is kind of brute-force C, which is right here. We're still iterating over all the posts when we collect them in volumes. And if possible we would really like to avoid any iteration over every single post because that does, that does not scale well. So we ended up considering spatial data structures. The first thing we tried was spatial hash. Each post is hashed to a key that is equivalent to their quantized coordinates. So we are essentially hashing posts within each grid cell into to the cell itself. In this deep up drug you can see the cells and each one contains about two to three posts along each axis. And this is the solution we shipped in Uncharted 4, Uncharted to Last Legacy, and the Last of Us Part II. And let's look at some stats compared to brute-force in the test bed of about 4,000 posts on the PS five, the brute-force approach took 6.72 milliseconds and using spatial hash, it only took 0.49 milliseconds, which is a 93% reduction in CPU time. And that's because some code for spatial hash. This is the old collection code and then the new one, we no longer need to pass in all the posts, we just iterate over all the collection volumes. And for each volume we iterate through all the hash grids that are touched by this collection volumes bounding volume. And then we add the post from those hash grids to a hash post set. And then we do the standard volume collection using this reduced post set derived from the hash set. So this is early very good, but as programmers, when we see something that scales linearly, we ask ourselves can we make it logarithmic? And the answer is yes. Our next step was bounding volume hierarchies. And then the structure we chose was a AABB tree. For those who are not familiar with this concept, AABB stands for access aligned bounding box, which is basically a bounding box of an object where the local access of the box is aligned with the world space cardinal directions. And then put this in the, put this in the binary tree structure, each node corresponds to a bounding box that is a union of the bounding boxes of its two children. So here are some posts on the ground and then this is the corresponding AABB tree. And here you'll see the nodes are offset vertically just for visualization. These nodes are actually all on the ground. They all contain some posts. And a shout out to Aaron Kado for his talk at GDC 2019, math for game developers. Dynamic bounding volume hierarchies, Our AABB tree implementation is based on this presentation. So if you're interested, check this, check out this talk, it's really awesome. This implementation supports arbitrary large spatial coverage with finite node sizes and also supports dynamic node insertion and deletion. Also tree balancing using custom node cost heuristic. So this is essentially a binary search tree, but in space, oh, sorry, I mean spatial not in space. So when you're using a binary search tree, just a regular one, you want to balance the tree as you dynamically insert and delete nodes, right? Because we want to minimize the average query cost. And what we want to do the same for AABB tree, but we are not balancing the search iteration. We want to balance the the search queries. So in Aaron's implementation, that's in Overwatch, the queries they were balancing was raycast because it's a first person shooter. So it makes sense for them to balance the tree using a node cost of the surface area of each node. But it doesn't work for us. It's because our query, our query is not raycast. Our query is a spatial query to find out what nodes are touching the collection volumes. So for us, a better cost heuristic is surface area plus exempt extend sum to the power of eight. And don't ask me why to the power of eight. This is the result of trial and error. And this works out the best. This is for discouraging the tree from generating extremely long, extremely thin and long notes. Because if we just use surface area, a bounding boxer that is 1000 times one times one is the same surface area as the bounding box that's 10 by 10 by 10. And we don't want that. So by adding extend sum to the power of eight to the cost heuristic function, this effectively discourage extremely shaped nodes. This is a dense or full binary tree. So that means if the total post is N, the total internal node is N minus one, that means a total node is two N minus one. That's okay. Some code. So this is our new collect in volumes function. We start from the root node for each collection volume and then we visit the root using that volume. Inside the visit function. Inside the visit function, we test if the nodes AABB intersects with the volume. If not good we early out. But if it does intersect, we recursively visit each of the two children with the same volume. And if the node is a leaf node, that means this node is a post and then we just perform the same post-test. Well, but at this point it's already done. So we just add the node to the collected post set. Here is an example of using a small sphere to collect from this tree we saw earlier. Each level is offset to a different height. So we can see it better. All the bounding boxes are actually on the floor. Some of them are touching the sphere. We have a total post of 13 that means internal nodes. We have 12 internal nodes. And after intersecting four internal nodes, the sphere intersected two nodes. Through the process, by rejecting three internal nodes, it effectively rejected 11 posts. So we tested the sphere against a total of nine nodes where they are actually 25 nodes. So switching from spatial hash to AABB tree gave us another performance gain, it further cut down the CPU time from 0.49 milliseconds to 0.25. That's a 49% gain. And this is the solution we shipped in the Last of Us Part I, plus this additional optimization I'm going to talk about. So this is the code we saw earlier. This section is the meat of the rejection that prunes the tree early. And we asked ourselves, can we make this even more aggressive than a spatial test? The answer is yes. We use this concept of broad phase basically for each criteria or for some of the criteria there we can find cheap ways. There are cheap counterparts that can work on an internal node to quickly decide if it's safe to reject this node entirely early on. And we borrow this phrase broad phase from physics engines, which is a term used for algorithms to quickly reject objects that are not possible to collide. That's not start too far away so that we don't perform the naive unscored algorithm to check which objects are colliding with which. Here are some examples for broad phases. The first one is if the post criterion rejects post when the distance between the target and the post is less than the threshold. The corresponding broad phase is checking if the internal nodes AABB, if the distance between the NPC and the furthest node, furthest post, sorry, furthest point in the AABB, is less than the threshold. That means there's no way there's a post in there that's larger than a threshold. So we can just safely reject this internal node entirely. Another example is reject a post if the post is not in stealth grass. So note that this is a binary, binary check. It's either a, it's a yes or no question. So we can encode the results of this for each post as a bit inside a bit mask and then propagate this bit mask, up the tree into each internal node using bitwise-OR so to reject an internal node. We just test the bit mask on this internal node and if it fails, we can just confidently say that there's no way this node contains any post that can satisfy this bit mess check. Third example is to reject a post that is behind the target and the corresponding broad phase is simple, reject an internal note if the entire AABB tree is behind the target. So let's look at some example. First is not near the player. Here is a AABB tree on posts. Look at the pink crosses with numbers. Those are the rejected posts by this broad phase. And then look at the tiny text boxes. Each text box marks up a internal node being rejected by this broad phase. So in this particular screenshot by rejecting nine nodes, we rejected a total of 26 posts. And then another example, not behind the player, this is a different view. The NPC is closer to us and then the player is further. So we don't want, we want to reject the posts behind a player. And here here are the rejected posts and the AABB tree. Again, these numbered pink crosses are the posts being rejected. And then each text box is an the broad phase. So by rejecting just 17 nodes, we effectively rejected 82 posts in the screenshot. Finally, here are some performance stats. So by adding broad phases in our test bed, we can further, we further cut down the performance cost by 20%. So overall compared to spatial hash, we cut the CPU time by over half, which is pretty good. And as mentioned before, all these applications don't have big, don't have to be constrained to AI or NPC. You can apply this to any gameplay like in Uncharted 4 multiplayer. We use post selectors to determine where to spawn minions in the boss fight. Also in the multiplayer settings, you can use post selectors to choose where to spawn your allies. And then the criteria would be preferring posts that cannot be seen by any enemy players but are still close to any ally. Finally, here's a little discussion on our future research topics, on post. We announced that our next project is going to be a multiplayer online multiplayer game. It has much larger levels. So our maximum supported posts went up from 8,000 posts to hundreds of thousands of posts, plus a lot more NPCs. And this became a problem. The the cheap bit wise operations became our performance bottleneck because we just have so many ints to process and so many raycast cache entries. So we started developing sparse post sets. So instead of a dense bit array, sparse post set, it is a map of nav mesh IDs that correspond to a local smaller dense post set to each nav mesh. And this has effectively remove the part, we do a lot of bitwise operation from the bottleneck. And this does come with a downside that each post-it now has a limit on the next number of nav meshes it can refer to. But this hasn't become a problem for us yet because for each known use cases, we can just choose the sparse post set to have a safe maximum number of nav meshes it can refer to, for example, if we know we are collecting posts around say 20 meters, it can hardly touch eight nav meshes. So for this use case, if we just use sparse post sets that can hold up to 32 nav meshes, then will be very safe. Another area of research we've only started a little bit is adding and removing nav mesh tree nodes based on player proximity. One thing I did not talk about earlier was we don't have one master large post tree. We actually store nav meshes in a nav mash tree and then we collect from the nav mesh trees for those collected nav meshes we collect from their local post trees. And in our large levels we have 5,000 nav meshes. That's a huge nav mesh tree. And all the players are only ever close to maybe up to 100 nav meshes. So we are still researching whether it's worth the effort to dynamically adding or moving the nav meshes based on player proximity to the master nav mesh tree. And then the last one, since we switched over to a completely new representation for post sets, that is the sparse post set. We have not looked at, we have not revisited our recast result caching logic yet. Maybe there's a more efficient way to do that using our new representation. We're not sure yet because we haven't started researching. Okay, so here's a summary of the talk. We went over post generation at tools-time, load-time and run-time. And then we cover, we walked over the evolution and optimizations of our post system from brute-force all the way to AABB tree with broad phases, and then how we cache raycast results using post sets and how we look for cache hits and misses. And finally how we represent post sets in different ways using a dense bit array or a sparse bit array. And this is the end of the talk and I hope you find it useful. We are hiring. If you're interested, please visit our website. The bottom left, is it bottom left or bottom right? I can't tell. Oh, bottom left. Sorry. Those are my socials. And thank you all very much for coming. (audience clapping) So we have some time for Q&A if anyone have questions? There are mics on the side. - Hello? Hi I'm Matthew Jack, thank you for the mention. - Oh, oh, oh, whoa. You're welcome. Sorry, I just learned about the article two days ago. - It's great. It's still relevant. So yeah. Now at Kythera AI, I'm curious, you mentioned that you use path distance quite a lot in your queries. - Yes. - Which is super useful, but can be difficult to do efficiently. How do you just run a python query for some posts? - Oh. - Or do you have a clever AI of doing that? - Okay, so the question is we use path distance a lot in our criteria. And as you know, path finds are not cheap. And do we just do one single path find to all the posts? The answer is no. We use what we call the under we call. So no, we call normal path finds, directed path find. And we use what we call undirected path find, which is basically the, the flood fill of the nav mesh. And then it's basically the intermediate data from a star as we fulfill the nav mesh. And then we just cut it off at a certain distance, say 40 meters, 80 meters around each character. And then we just time slice it. We do one undirected path find for each character, every frame. So it's not up to date, but the latency is acceptable. And then from that intermediate data we can quickly derive the approximate path distance for each post. So as you saw the criterion, the criterion's name was not path length, it was approximate path length because it's from the intermediate data and it's an approximate. - Okay, thank you. And thanks for the great talk. - Oh, thank you. Any more questions? Okay. Oh wait. Oh, there's one. - Yeah, you might not be able to talk about this at this point, but I'm just kind of curious at how all of the posts are scaling in a multi-player environment where, you know, there's a lot of relevancy questions and like can you, how you optimize it so that you're not, you know, querying too much? - Oh yeah. - Regards in the multiplayer. - So yes, as as mentioned, oh, so the question is how do we scale up the number of posts in a multiplayer setting? So as mentioned before, we are scaling up from a couple thousand of posts to hundred of thousands of posts. And to be honest, we are still researching. And then the only thing we currently are experimenting with is yes, as you mentioned, network relevancy, whether or not it's close enough to the player and if they're not close to the player, we just don't even consider them. So that is the big direction. But we are still early in research, so I don't have any specifics yet. All right. Thank for the question. - Hi. For your visibility checks, do you just use the physics raycasts directly or do you have some other approximation layer to help accelerate that? - No, we just have, we just use physics raycasts, but we do time slice them because they're not cheap. So I think our budget, I mean we tune it so that we complete, we give it at most four frames to finish all the raycasts before starting to return meaningful scores. And in our single player games, four frames of latency is okay. Latency in decision making is not really visible to the players, so it is acceptable. Oh yes. - Yes. I'm wondering about the different post types and if you could generate, or what kinds could you generate a tool time counter or any ones that you had to place manually? - Like are there any issues? so I'm not familiar with the part that generates the cover posts at tools time but, my rough idea is that the tool just look at the collision data and figure out where the corners are, where the walls are, and then just automatically place covers there. And sometimes they are false positive, false negatives. So designers have to go in and clean up, they can delete the tool generated ones and hand place their own posts and sometimes they can, they don't have to place them one by one, there are tools where they can just lay down a box saying that I want a new grid here and, and we'll just generate post there. So yeah, I hope that answers your question. - Yeah, right, thanks. - No problem. Okay, no more questions. Well, if you just want to chat or have other questions you want to, I mean you think about later, I'll be outside at the wrap up area for a short while and thank you all from coming to the talk.